The manuscript "Non-GPU-resident Symmetric Indefinite Factorization"
introduces a new algorithm for the factorization of dense symmetric
indefinite matrices based on a Aasen's algorithm. In more details,
this new algorithm is based on a communication avoiding variant of the
original Aasen's algorithm and aims at reducing the impact of CPU-GPU
communications in the case where the input problem does not fit on the
GPU memory. To achieve this objective, the authors use a
non-GPU-resident strategy that they apply on the original
factorization algorithm. Finally the authors present experimental
study of their algorithm and compare it with two other popular
algorithms which are Bunch Kaufman and partitioned Aasen algorithms.

The proposed algorithm consists in a simple modification of the
Partitioned Aasen algorithm using a non-GPU-resident strategy. This
strategy has been already been widely applied in the context of dense
linear algebra kernels. In addition, the proposed algorithm seems to
be a straightforward solution to cope with memory limitations. As a
results we do not believe that the novelty of the work presented in
this manuscript is not very high and we suggest that the paper should
be rejected. In addition, the evolution of the unified memory feature
in the next generation of Nvidia GPU (Pascal architecture) will
simplify and increase the efficiency of memory sharing for CPU and
GPU. Therefore we think that the issue of hiding communication and
computation in the context of an hybrid CPU-GPU architecture might no
longer be an issue in a non distant future. As a result we also think
the main focus of this paper is not extremely relevant for the
emerging GPU architectures.
